This repo supplements work done [here](https://github.com/nextstrain/augur)

## Abstract

Dengue virus (DENV), the causative agent of dengue hemorrhagic fever, exists as four genetically distinct serotypes, DENV1-4. These serotypes are antigenically distinct: symptomatic reinfection with a homotypic virus is very rare, while reinfection with a heterotypic virus is associated with severe disease. Until recently, it has been assumed that viruses within each serotype are antigenically uniform. However, specific genotypes of each serotype have been anecdotally associated with varying severity of patient outcomes and epidemic magnitude. One hypothesis is that each serotype contains overlooked, meaningful antigenic diversity. Here, we analyze a publically available neutralization titer dataset to quantify and identify genetic drivers of DENV intraserotype antigenic diversity. We map antigenic changes to specific branches of the virus phylogeny, and interpolate across the tree to estimate the antigenic distance between pairs of viruses based on their relative positions in the phylogeny. We report modest but significant antigenic diversity within each serotype of DENV, suggesting that antigenic interactions between specific viral genotypes meaningfully contributes to DENV epidemiology. In real-world virus populations, even subtle shifts in antigenic phenotypes—below the limit of detection in neutralization assays—can contribute to viral fitness and drive clade turnover. To characterize these more nuanced antigenic changes, we also analyze DENV population dynamics. We estimate the strength of selection for novel epitopes across the viral phylogeny and characterize patterns of competition between co-circulating DENV genotypes. By leveraging both molecular data and real-world population dynamics, these results provide a more nuanced understanding of dengue antigenic evolution, with important ramifications for improving vaccine design and epidemic preparedness. 
